JOSS paper (#100)
COSIMA/regional-mom6: paper/paper.md

Author: it's convenient if you have the habit of starting a new line for every sentence.
this way will make commenting on the PR easier.... Otherwise 1 line is a whole paragraph so it's very hard for somebody to suggest a "code change" to fix a typo.

Having the entire process for setting up a regional configuration running in a Jupyter notebook dramatically reduces the barrier of entry for first-time users, or those without a strong background in FORTRAN, experience in compiling and running scripts in terminals, and manipulating netCDF files.
Besides making regional modelling with MOM6 more accessible, our package can automate the generation of multiple experiments (e.g., series of perturbation experiments), saving time, effort, and improving reproducibility. 

We designed `regional_mom6` with automation of regional configurations in mind.
However, the package's code design and modularity allows makes more complex configurations possible since users can use their own custom-made grids with more complex boundaries and construct the boundary forcing terms one by one.

<!-- As more advanced use cases emerge, users can contribute their grid generation functions as well as example configuration files and notebooks.  -->

![The curl of the wind stress from a regional MOM6 simulation in the Tasman sea. The source code can be found at https://github.com/ashjbarnes/tasman-tides. \label{fig:example}](tasman-speed.png){ width=80% }.

> Figure \autoref{fig:example} is an example of a domain set up with the `regional_mom6` package. In this case, the forcing datasets are GLORYS and ERA5, with an 80th degree horizontal resolution. 

Author: Can you fill in the details I suggest below?

```suggestion
Figure \autoref{fig:example} is an example of a domain set up with the `regional_mom6` package. In this case, the forcing datasets are GLORYS and ERA5, with an 1/80-th degree horizontal resolution (around X kilometers) and XXX vertical levels. 
```

---
title: 'regional_mom6: A Python package for automatic generation of regional configurations for the Modular Ocean Model 6'

tags:
  - Python
  - ocean modeling
  - regional modeling
  - mom6
authors:
  - name: Ashley J. Barnes
    orcid: 0000-0000-0000-0000
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: "1, 2" # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Author Without ORCID
    equal-contrib: true # (This is how you can denote equal contributions between multiple authors)
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Author with no affiliation
    corresponding: true # (This is how to denote the corresponding author)
    affiliation: 3
  - given-names: Ludwig
    dropping-particle: van
    surname: Beethoven
    affiliation: 3
affiliations:
 - name: Australian National University, Australia
   index: 1
 - name: ARC Centre of Excellence in Climate Extremes, Australia
   index: 2
 - name: Independent Researcher, Country
   index: 3
date: 27 Μαρψη 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

> Modular Ocean Model 6 (MOM6) is a widely used general circulation ocean model developed at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) at Princeton.

Author: Let's not mention "Princeton". It's not like it's the most famous city in the world... If you insist let's say "Princeton, NJ at the USA". But what's the point?

```suggestion
Modular Ocean Model 6 (MOM6) is a widely used general circulation ocean model developed at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) [@Adcroft2019MOM6].
```

Among other improvements on its predecessor MOM5, this iteration permits open boundary conditions, and MOM6 is subsequently growing in popularity for high resolution regional modelling.
However, setting up a regional domain can be challenging and time consuming for new users even for the simplest rectangular domains.
The `regional_mom6` python package automates much of the regridding, metadata encoding, grid generation and other miscellaneous steps, allowing models to be up and running more quickly.

> The `regional_mom6` package takes raw files containing the initial condition, forcing and bathymetry

Author: ```suggestion
The `regional_mom6` package takes raw files containing the initial condition, forcing, and bathymetry
```

> These inputs can be on the Arakawa A,B or C grids, and the package performs the appropriate interpolation using `xESMF` `@zhang:2020` onto the C grid required by MOM6.

Author: ```suggestion
These inputs can be on the Arakawa A,B or C grids, and the package performs the appropriate interpolation using `xESMF` [@zhang:2020] onto the C grid required by MOM6.
```

> This base grid can either be constucted based on the user's desired resolution and choice of pre-configured options, or the user can provide their own horizontal or vertical grids.

Author: ```suggestion
This base grid can either be constructed based on the user's desired resolution and choice of pre-configured options, or the user can provide their own horizontal or vertical grids.
```

In either case, the package then handles the coordinates, dimensions, metadata and encoding to ensure that the final input files are in formats expected by MOM6.
Additionally, the tricky case of a `seam' in the longitude of the raw input data (for instance at -180 and 180) is handled automatically, removing the need for any preprocessing of the data. 
The package also comes with pre-configured run directories, which can be automatically copied and modified to match the user's experiment
Subsequently, a user need only copy a demo notebook, modify the longitude, latitude and resolution, and simply by running the notebook from start to finish will generate all they need for running a MOM6 experiment in their domain of interest.

> This package is targeted at users with basic Python skills, and contains a documented tutorial based on publicly available forcing and bathymetry datasets. 

Author: ```suggestion
This package is targeted at users with basic Python skills, and contains a documented tutorial that uses a publicly available forcing and bathymetry datasets [mention which datasets, perhaps cite?].
```

Reviewer: Yes was thinking about citing. How would you in-text cite the copernicus data? Their info page doesn't come with an example bibtex entry just says to list the DOIs of the products you used: https://help.marine.copernicus.eu/en/articles/4444611-how-to-cite-copernicus-marine-products-and-services

Besides making regional modelling with MOM6 more accessible, this package also serves to automate the generation of multiple experiments, saving time and improving reproducibility. 

Although `regional_mom6` was designed to automate the set-up as much as possible to aid first time users, it can also be used for more advanced configurations.
The modular design of the code means that users can use their own custom grids and set up boundaries one-by-one to accommodate more complex domain shapes.
As more advanced use cases emerge, users can contribute their grid generation functions as well as example configuration files and notebooks. 

# Statement of need

The learning curve for setting up a regional ocean model can be quite steep.
In the case of MOM6, there are several tools scattered around github like those collected in ESMG's grid tools `@gridtools`, as well as examples hardcoded for particular domains, input files and hardware.
However, there is no one-stop-shop to learn how to get a regional MOM6 model up and running, meaning that a newcomer must collect many disparate pieces of information from around the internet unless they are able to get help.

> Other models have packages to aid in domain setup like `Pyroms` `@pyroms` for ROMS and `MITGCM_python` `@mitgcmpy` for MITGCM.

Author: ```suggestion
Other models have packages to aid in domain setup like `Pyroms` `@pyroms` for ROMS and `MITgcm_python` [@mitgcmpy] for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology General Circulation Model (MITgcm; [@ marshall1997finite]).
```

---
title: 'regional-mom6: Automatic generation of regional configurations for the Modular Ocean Model v6 in Python'

tags:
  - Python
  - ocean modeling
  - regional modeling
  - mom6
authors:
  - name: Ashley J. Barnes
    orcid: 0000-0003-3165-8676
    affiliation: "1, 2" # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Navid C. Constantinou
    orcid: 0000-0002-8149-4094
    affiliation: "1, 2, 3, 4"
  - name: Angus H. Gibson
    orcid: 0000-0001-7577-3604
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Andrew E. Kiss
    orcid: 0000-0001-8960-9557
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Chris Chapman
    orcid: 0000-0002-6030-1951
    affiliation: 5
  - name: John Reilly

>     affiliation: 6

Author: @reillyja do you have an Orcid number? if so, can you add it?

  - name: Dhruv Bhagtani
    orcid: 0000-0002-1222-375X
    affiliation: "1, 2"
affiliations:
 - name: Australian National University, Australia
   index: 1
 - name: ARC Centre of Excellence for Climate Extremes, Australia
   index: 2
 - name: University of Melbourne, Australia
   index: 3
 - name: ARC Centre of Excellence for the Weather of the 21st Century, Australia
   index: 4
 - name: CSIRO Environment, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia
   index: 5
 - name: University of Tasmania, Australia
   index: 6

date: 28 March 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

`regional-mom6` is a Python package that provides an easy and versatile way to set up regional configurations of the Modular Ocean Model version 6 (MOM6).

In the ocean, fast and small-scale motions (from ~100m to ~100km varying at time scales of hours to days) play an important role in shaping the large-scale ocean circulation and climate (length scales ~10,000km varying at decadal time scales) [@Melet2022ch2; @deLavergne2022ch3; @Gula2022ch8].

> Despite the increase in computational power and the use of graphical processing units that can bring breakthrough performance and speedup [@silvestri2023oceananigansjl], there are always processes, boundary, or forcing features that are smaller than the model's grid spacing and, thus, remain unresolved in operational ocean models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Despite the increase in computational power and the use of graphical processing units that can bring breakthrough performance and speedup [@silvestri2023oceananigansjl], there are always processes, boundary, or forcing features that are smaller than the model's grid spacing and, thus, remain unresolved in global ocean models.
```
"operational" means something different (ocean forecasting systems)

  - name: Angus H. Gibson
    orcid: 0000-0001-7577-3604
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Chris Chapman
    orcid: 0000-0002-6030-1951
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Dhruv Bhagtani
    orcid: 0000-0002-1222-375X
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: John Reily
    affiliation: 4
  - name: Andrew E. Kiss
    orcid: 0000-0001-8960-9557
    affiliation: "1, 2"
affiliations:
 - name: Australian National University, Australia
   index: 1
 - name: ARC Centre of Excellence for Climate Extremes, Australia
   index: 2
 - name: CSIRO Environment, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia
   index: 3
 - name: University of Tasmania, Australia
   index: 4

date: 28 March 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

The Modular Ocean Model version 6 (MOM6) is a widely-used open-source general circulation ocean--sea ice model, developed mainly at the NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory [@Adcroft2019MOM6].
MOM6 contains several improvements over its predecessor MOM5 [@griffies2014elements], including the implementation of the Arbitrary-Lagrangian-Eulerian vertical coordinates [@griffies2020ALE], more efficient tracer advection schemes, and state-of-the art parameterizations of sub-grid scale physics.

> The nature of turbulent flows is such that smaller scales of motion emerge emerge spontaneously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The nature of turbulent flows is such that smaller scales of motion emerge spontaneously.
```

To resolve more scales of motion within the constraints of computational power, we can turn to regional ocean modeling.

A regional ocean model simulates the ocean only at a prescribed region, which is a subset of the global ocean.
To do that, we need to apply open boundary conditions at the region's boundaries, that is, we need to impose conditions that mimic the oceanic flow that we are not simulating [@Orlanski1976].
Regional ocean models can be run at higher resolutions while limiting the required computational resources.
Higher-resolution regional ocean models improve the representation of smaller-scale motions, such as tidal beams, mixing, mesoscale and sub-mesoscale circulation, as well as the oceanic response to smaller-scale bathymetric or coastal features (such as headlands, islands, sea-mounts, or submarine canyons) and surface forcing (such as atmospheric fronts and convective storms).

MOM6 is a widely-used open-source general circulation ocean--sea ice model, written in Fortran and developed mainly at the NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory [@Adcroft2019MOM6].

> MOM6 contains several improvements over its predecessor MOM5 [@griffies2014elements], including the implementation of the Arbitrary-Lagrangian-Eulerian vertical coordinates [bleck2002gvc; @griffies2020ALE], more efficient tracer advection schemes, and state-of-the art parameterizations of sub-grid scale physics.

Author: in these two sentences I think we enter a bit too much into describing MOM6...
E.g., why do we need to mention if it's "developed mainly by GFDL" or not? Or why is it relevant whether it has better parametrisations?

@ashjbarnes, @aekiss, @ChrisC28

---

> title: 'regional-mom6: Automatic generation of regional configurations for the Modular Ocean Model 6 in Python'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: 'regional-mom6: Automatic generation of regional configurations for the Modular Ocean Model v6 in Python'
```

tags:
  - Python
  - ocean modeling
  - regional modeling
  - mom6
authors:
  - name: Ashley J. Barnes
    orcid: 0000-0003-3165-8676
    affiliation: "1, 2" # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Navid C. Constantinou
    orcid: 0000-0002-8149-4094
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Angus H. Gibson
    orcid: 0000-0001-7577-3604
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Chris Chapman
    orcid: 0000-0002-6030-1951
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Dhruv Bhagtani
    orcid: 0000-0002-1222-375X
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: John Reily
    affiliation: 4
  - name: Andrew E. Kiss
    orcid: 0000-0001-8960-9557
    affiliation: "1, 2"
affiliations:
 - name: Australian National University, Australia
   index: 1
 - name: ARC Centre of Excellence for Climate Extremes, Australia
   index: 2
 - name: CSIRO Environment, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia
   index: 3
 - name: University of Tasmania, Australia
   index: 4

date: 28 March 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

> The Modular Ocean Model version 6 (MOM6) is a widely-used open-source general circulation ocean--sea ice model, developed mainly at the NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory [@Adcroft2019MOM6].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Modular Ocean Model version 6 (MOM6) is a widely-used open-source general circulation ocean--sea ice model, written in Fortran and developed mainly at the NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory [@Adcroft2019MOM6].
```

> MOM6 contains several improvements over its predecessor MOM5 [@griffies2014elements], including the implementation of the Arbitrary-Lagrangian-Eulerian vertical coordinates [@griffies2020ALE], more efficient tracer advection schemes, and state-of-the art parameterizations of sub-grid scale physics.

Reviewer 2: I think it would read better if this was the 3rd paragraph.

> The nature of turbulent flows is such that smaller scales of motion emerge spontaneously, i.e., flows exhibit forward energy cascade [@richardson1922weather].

Reviewer 2: If this becomes the 1st paragraph, open with a brief summary of what this package does, e.g. "The regional-mom6 Python package provides an easy and versatile way to set up regional configurations of the MOM6 ocean model."

Oceanic flows are no exception to this rule.
What might seem counter-intuitive, however, is that in the ocean the fast and small-scale motions (from ~100m to ~100km varying at time scales of hours to days) are very important in shaping the large-scale ocean circulation and climate (length scales ~10,000km varying at decadal time scales) [@Melet2022ch2; @deLavergne2022ch3; @Gula2022ch8].
Despite the increase in computational power and the use of graphical processing units that can bring breakthrough performance and speedup [@silvestri2023oceananigansjl], there will always be processes that are smaller than the model's grid spacing and, thus, remain unresolved.

To resolve more scales of motion within the constraints of computational power, we can turn to regional ocean modeling.

> Regional ocean modeling simulates the ocean only at a prescribed region which is a subset of the global ocean.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regional ocean modeling simulates the ocean only in a prescribed region which is a subset of the global ocean.
```

> To do that, we need to apply open boundary conditions at the region's boundaries, that is, we need to impose conditions that mimic the oceanic flow that we are not simulating (open boundary conditions; @Orlanski1976).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do that, we need to apply open boundary conditions at the region's boundaries, that is, we need to impose conditions that mimic the oceanic flow that we are not simulating (Orlanski1976).
```

> \autoref{fig:tasman} shows the surface currents from a regional ocean simulation of the Tasman sea that was configured using the `regional-mom6` package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, \autoref{fig:tasman} shows the surface currents from a regional ocean simulation of the Tasman sea that was configured using the `regional-mom6` package.
```

> The boundaries of the domain depicted in \autoref{fig:tasman}b are forced with the ocean flow from a reanalysis product that is shown in \autoref{fig:tasman}a.

Reviewer 2: need 2 panels in Fig 1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The boundaries of the domain depicted in \autoref{fig:tasman}b are forced with the ocean flow from a global data product product that is shown in \autoref{fig:tasman}a.
```
("reanalysis" is specialist jargon)

MOM6 provides support for open boundary conditions and thus is becoming popular for regional ocean modeling studies (see, e.g., @gmd-16-6943-2023, @egusphere-2024-394) in addition to global configurations.
However, setting up a regional configuration for MOM6 can be challenging, time consuming, and often involves using several programming languages, a few different tools, and also manually editing/tweaking some input files.
The `regional-mom6` Python package overcomes these difficulties, automatically generating a regional MOM6 configuration of the user's choice with relatively simple domain geometry.

![A snapshot of the ocean surface currents from a MOM6 regional simulation of the Tasman sea. The simulation is forced by GLORYS and ERA5 reanalysis datasets and configured with a horizontal resolution of 1/80th degree and 100 vertical levels (see @tasmantides for the source code). \label{fig:tasman}](tasman_speed.png){ width=80% }

> The `regional-mom6` package takes as input various datasets that contain the ocean initial condition, the boundary forcing (ocean and atmosphere) for the regional domain, and the bathymetry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `regional-mom6` package takes as input various datasets that contain the ocean initial condition, the boundary forcing (ocean and atmosphere) for the regional domain, and the seafloor topography.
```
avoid "bathymetry" jargon?

Reviewer 2: Also, would a schematic be useful to illustrate this?

The input datasets can be on the Arakawa A, B, or C grids [@arakawa1977computational]; the package performs the appropriate interpolation using `xESMF` [@xesmf] under the hood, to put the everything on the C grid required by MOM6.

> This base grid for the regional configuration can be constructed in two ways.
> The first, by the user defining a desired resolution and choosing between pre-configured options.
> The second, by the user providing a pre-existing horizontal and/or vertical MOM6 grids.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This base grid for the regional configuration can be constructed in two ways,
either by the user defining a desired resolution and choosing between pre-configured options,
or by the user providing a pre-existing horizontal and/or vertical MOM6 grids.
```

> The user can use MOM6's Arbitrary-Lagrangian-Eulerian vertical coordinates, regardless of the native vertical coordinates of the boundary forcing input.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The user can use MOM6's Arbitrary-Lagrangian-Eulerian vertical coordinates (Griffies et al., 2020), regardless of the native vertical coordinates of the boundary forcing input.
```

Griffies, S. M., Adcroft, A., and Hallberg, R. W. (2020). A primer on the vertical Lagrangian-remap method in ocean models based on finite volume generalized vertical coordinates. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 12(10). https://doi.org/10.1029%2F2019ms001954

Reviewer 2: not sure if that's the primary reference?

Author: Hm.. OK.. @ashjbarnes?

The package automates the re-gridding of all the required forcing input, takes care of all the metadata encoding, generates the regional grid, and ensures that the final input files are in the format expected by MOM6.

> Additionally, the tricky case of a regional configuration that includes the 'seam' in the longitude of the raw input data is handled automatically, removing the need for any preprocessing of the input data.
> (For example, such a 'seam'-related issue arises for a 10ᵒ-wide regional configuration centered at Fiji (178ᵒE) when forced by input with native longitude coordinate in the range between 180ᵒW and 180ᵒE.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, the tricky case of a regional configuration that includes the 'seam' in the longitude of the raw input data (e.g. a 10ᵒ-wide regional configuration centred at Fiji (178ᵒE) and forced by input with native longitude coordinate in the range 180ᵒW -- 180ᵒE) is handled automatically, removing the need for any preprocessing of the input data.
```

Reviewer 2: Is the Arctic tripole seam also handled?

Author: I think no because one limitation of the package is that the regional config boundaries are lines of constant lat/lon. Right @ashjbarnes ?

> The above-mentioned automation allows users to setup a regional MOM6 configuration using only Python and from the convenience of a single Jupyter notebook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This automation allows users to set up a regional MOM6 configuration using only Python and from the convenience of a single Jupyter notebook.
```

> Rules-of-thumb to guide the user in setting grid parameters such as the regional domains resolution, can be found in the paper by @Herzfeld2011.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@Herzfeld2011 provides rules of thumb to guide the user in setting regional grid parameters such as the resolution.
```

<!--
Subsequently, a user need only copy a demo notebook, modify the longitude, latitude and resolution, and simply by running the notebook from start to finish will generate all they need for running a MOM6 experiment in their domain of interest.
-->

> `regional-mom6` is installable via `conda`, it is continuously tested, and comes with an extensive documentation that also includes documented tutorials and examples for setting up regional MOM6 configurations using publicly-available forcing and bathymetry datasets (namely, the GLORYS dataset for ocean boundary forcing [@glorys], the ERA5 reanalysis for atmospheric forcing [@era5], and the GEBCO dataset for bathymetry [@gebco]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`regional-mom6` is installable via `conda`, it is continuously tested, and comes with extensive documentation including tutorials and examples for setting up regional MOM6 configurations using publicly-available forcing and bathymetry datasets (namely, the GLORYS dataset for ocean boundary forcing [@glorys], the ERA5 reanalysis for atmospheric forcing [@era5], and the GEBCO dataset for seafloor topography [@gebco]).
```

With the entire process for setting up a regional configuration streamlined to run within a Jupyter notebook, the package dramatically reduces the barrier-to-entry for first-time users, or those without a strong background in Fortran, experience in compiling and running scripts in terminals, and manipulating netCDF files.
Besides making regional modelling with MOM6 more accessible, our package can automate the generation of multiple experiments (e.g., a series of perturbation experiments), saving time and effort, and improving reproducibility. 

We designed `regional-mom6` with automation of regional configurations in mind.

> However, the package's code design and modularity makes more complex configurations possible since users can use their own custom-made grids with more complex boundaries and construct the boundary forcing terms one by one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the package's code design and modularity make more complex configurations possible since users can use their own custom-made grids with more complex boundaries and construct the boundary forcing terms one by one.
```

# Statement of need

> The learning curve for setting up a regional ocean model can be quite steep, and it is not obvious for a new user what inputs are required, nor the appropriate format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The learning curve for setting up a regional ocean model can be steep, and it is not obvious for a new user what inputs are required, nor the appropriate format.
```

In the case of MOM6, there are several tools scattered in Github repositories, for example those collected in Earth System Modeling Group grid tools [@gridtools].

> Also, there exist several regional configuration examples (e.g., [ADD 1-2 CITATIONS OF REPOS HERE?]) but they are hardcoded for particular domains, specific input files, and work only on specific high-performance computing machines.

Reviewer 2: [ADD 1-2 CITATIONS OF REPOS HERE?]

Until now there has been no one-stop-shop for users to learn how to get a regional MOM6 configuration up and running.

> Users are required to use several tools in several programming languages and then modify --sometimes by hand-- some of the input metadata to bring everything into the format that MOM6 expects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users are required to use several tools in several programming languages and then modify -- sometimes by hand -- some of the input metadata to bring everything into the format that MOM6 expects.
```

---
title: 'regional_mom6: A Python package for automatic generation of regional configurations for the Modular Ocean Model 6'

tags:
  - Python
  - ocean modeling
  - regional
  - mom6
authors:
  - name: Ashley J. Barnes
    orcid: 0000-0000-0000-0000
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: "1, 2" # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Author Without ORCID
    equal-contrib: true # (This is how you can denote equal contributions between multiple authors)
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Author with no affiliation
    corresponding: true # (This is how to denote the corresponding author)
    affiliation: 3
  - given-names: Ludwig
    dropping-particle: van
    surname: Beethoven
    affiliation: 3
affiliations:
 - name: Lyman Spitzer, Jr. Fellow, Princeton University, USA
   index: 1
 - name: Institution Name, Country
   index: 2
 - name: Independent Researcher, Country
   index: 3
date: 16 February 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

> Modular Ocean Model 6 (MOM6) is a widely used general circulation ocean model developed at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) at Princeton. Among other improvements on its predecessor MOM5, this iteration permits open boundary conditions, and MOM6 is subsequently growing in popularity for high resolution regional modelling. However, setting up a regional domain can be challenging and time consuming for new users even for the simplest rectangular domains. The `regional_mom6` python package automates much of the regridding, metadata encoding, grid generation and other miscellaneous steps, allowing models to be up and running more quickly. 

Author: need citation for MOM6; we should cite:

```bibtex
@article{Adcroft2019MOM6,
    author = {Adcroft, Alistair and Anderson, Whit and Balaji, V. and Blanton, Chris and Bushuk, Mitchell and Dufour, Carolina O. and Dunne, John P. and Griffies, Stephen M. and Hallberg, Robert and Harrison, Matthew J. and Held, Isaac M. and Jansen, Malte F. and John, Jasmin G. and Krasting, John P. and Langenhorst, Amy R. and Legg, Sonya and Liang, Zhi and McHugh, Colleen and Radhakrishnan, Aparna and Reichl, Brandon G. and Rosati, Tony and Samuels, Bonita L. and Shao, Andrew and Stouffer, Ronald and Winton, Michael and Wittenberg, Andrew T. and Xiang, Baoqiang and Zadeh, Niki and Zhang, Rong},
    title = {The {GFDL} global ocean and sea ice model {OM4.0}: {Model} description and simulation features},
    journal = {Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems},
    volume = {11},
    number = {10},
    pages = {3167-3211},
    doi = {10.1029/2019MS001726},
    year = {2019}
}
```

Although `regional_mom6` was desined to automate the setup as much as possible to aid first time users, it can also be used for more advanced configurations. The modular desin of the code means that users can use their own custom grids and set up boundaries one-by-one to accommodate more complex domain shapes. 

# Statement of need

> The learning curve for setting up a regional ocean model can be quite steep. In the case of MOM6, there are several tools scattered around github like those collected in [ESMG's grid tools](https://github.com/ESMG/gridtools), as well as examples hardcoded for particular domains, input files and hardware. However, there is no one-stop-shop to learn how to get a regional MOM6 model up and running, meaning that a newcomer must collect many disparate pieces of information from around the internet unless they are able to get help. Other models have packages to aid in domain setup like [pyroms](https://github.com/ESMG/pyroms) for ROMS and [MITGCM_python](https://github.com/knaughten/mitgcm_python) for MITGCM. With MOM6's growing user base for regional applications, there is a need for a platform that walks users through regional domain setup from from start to finish, and ideally helps with some of the time consuming parts of the process that ought to be automated. 

Author: we should properly cite Github repositories; see example in the `.bib` file, i.e.

```bibtex
@misc{fidgit,
  author = {A. M. Smith and K. Thaney and M. Hahnel},
  title = {Fidgit: An ungodly union of GitHub and Figshare},
  year = {2020},
  publisher = {GitHub},
  journal = {GitHub repository},
  url = {https://github.com/arfon/fidgit}
}
```

Author: if there are a bunch of contributors you can add as authors the first 2-3 and then `and contributors},`

Reviewer: Thanks yes proper referencing was on my todo later I was just trying to brain dump for now!

Author: brain dump away!

# Citations

Citations to entries in paper.bib should be in
[rMarkdown](http://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/authoring_bibliographies_and_citations.html)
format.

If you want to cite a software repository URL (e.g. something on GitHub without a preferred
citation) then you can do it with the example BibTeX entry below for @fidgit.

For a quick reference, the following citation commands can be used:
- `@author:2001`  ->  "Author et al. (2001)"
- `[@author:2001]` -> "(Author et al., 2001)"
- `[@author1:2001; @author2:2001]` -> "(Author1 et al., 2001; Author2 et al., 2002)"

# Figures

Figures can be included like this:
![Caption for example figure.\label{fig:example}](figure.png)
and referenced from text using \autoref{fig:example}.

Figure sizes can be customized by adding an optional second parameter:
![Caption for example figure.](figure.png){ width=20% }

# Acknowledgements

> We acknowledge contributions from Brigitta Sipocz, Syrtis Major, and Semyeong
> Oh, and support from Kathryn Johnston during the genesis of this project.

Author: ```suggestion
We thank the Consortium for Ocean–Sea Ice Modeling in Australia ([cosima.org.au](https://cosima.org.au)) for useful discussions during the development of this package.
N.C.C. acknowledges funding from the Australian Research Council under DECRA Fellowship DE210100749.
```

---
title: 'regional_mom6: A Python package for automatic generation of regional configurations for the Modular Ocean Model 6'

tags:
  - Python
  - ocean modeling
  - regional modeling
  - mom6
authors:
  - name: Ashley J. Barnes
    orcid: 0000-0003-3165-8676
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: "1, 2" # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)

affiliations:
 - name: Australian National University, Australia
   index: 1
 - name: ARC Centre of Excellence in Climate Extremes, Australia
   index: 2

date: 27 March 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

> Modular Ocean Model 6 (MOM6) is a widely used general circulation ocean model developed at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) at Princeton `[@Adcroft2019MOM6]`.

Author: I don’t think you need to enclose citations in backticks.

```suggestion
Modular Ocean Model 6 (MOM6) is a widely used general circulation ocean model developed at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) at Princeton [@Adcroft2019MOM6].
```

Reviewer: thanks yeah I found their example confusing as they did use these quotations which didn't seem to work properly

Author: I think they were thinking you’d read it from the PDF :)

  - name: Angus H. Gibson
    orcid: 0000-0001-7577-3604
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Chris Chapman
    orcid: 0000-0002-6030-1951
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Dhruv Bhagtani
    orcid: 0000-0002-1222-375X
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: John Reily
    affiliation: 4
  - name: Andrew E. Kiss
    orcid: 0000-0001-8960-9557
    affiliation: "1, 2"
affiliations:
 - name: Australian National University, Australia
   index: 1
 - name: ARC Centre of Excellence in Climate Extremes, Australia
   index: 2
 - name: CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia
   index: 3
 - name: University of Tasmania, Australia
   index: 4

date: 28 March 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Modular Ocean Model 6 (MOM6) is a widely-used general circulation open-source ocean model developed mainly at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) [@Adcroft2019MOM6].
Among other improvements on its predecessor MOM5, this iteration permits open boundary conditions, and MOM6 is subsequently growing in popularity for high resolution regional modelling.
However, setting up a regional domain can be challenging and time consuming for new users even for the simplest rectangular domains.

> The `regional_mom6` python package automates much of the regridding, metadata encoding, grid generation and other miscellaneous steps, allowing models to be up and running more quickly.

Author: @ashjbarnes, why we say "automates much of the regridding" and not just "automates ~much of~ the regridding"?
is this intentional?

Reviewer: True - I guess I was being modest about it because it will only automate things that are currently supported. There are many use cases where you use the pipeline we've set up but customise things as you go (like the grid). The "much" was meant to be a qualifier for all of the things listed not just the regridding. We can remove it though

Author: Let's remove it because it gives that impression "this package will do mostly the regrinding and then you would need to finish off some of the regrinding yourselves"

<!-- As more advanced use cases emerge, users can contribute their grid generation functions as well as example configuration files and notebooks.  -->

> ![A figure](tasman_speed.png){ width=80% }.

Author: this `.` at the end was the culprit for the caption not appearing!!!!!!

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

Author: cc @ashjbarnes
